hi I'm SVA prakaran in this one let's
understand clearly the bayian
optimization method for hyperparameter
tuning now you know hyper parameter
tuning is a key step in machine learning
model building but it can be quite
time-taking so we will understand
everything about ban optimization
specifically okay but to be clear let's
quickly revise what is hyper parameter
tuning in the first place so that
everything will make sense and fall in
place this is how a machine learning
model building happens say you have the
features and the variable that you want
to pred X and Y respectively this you
have in your data the data is split into
training data set on which the model
will be actually trained then you will
do the prediction on validation data set
which has not been shown to the model
during training right so you will do the
prediction so X and Y from the train is
passed to the ml model this is the
training process okay you get the
predictions on the validation data set
the Y hat then you compare the Y hat
against the actual y from the validation
data set from that to compute the error
which is called the validation error
right we want this error to be as low as
possible in order to achieve that one of
the techniques is we try to see how the
model is performing that is the error
performances lower the error better the
performances now we try to adjust
various
combinations of the hyper parameters of
whichever ml model that we are dealing
with for example if we dealing with say
a random Forest algorithm the hyper
parameter could be something like the
number of
estimators and say the max depth right
there could be other parameters also
likewise if you use say support Vector
missions it could be what kernel you are
using what kernel you are using what the
value of the C parameters things like
that right so for a specific value of
these hyper parameters the error might
be lowest this is what hyperparameter
tuning is all about now the process of
hyperparameter tuning itself is done
using the most common method is using
what is called the grid search for
example you have two hyper parameters
hyper parameter 1 and two and these are
the possible values of hyper parameters
1 and two on the y axis right now we
want to see for various combinations of
these hyper parameters what is the model
error is either the error can be the
lowest or you compute the accuracy of
the model and try to reach the maximum
accuracy whichever whichever way that
you want to do it so we train the models
for all these combinations of both of
these parameters and see which is the
lowest error let's say okay this is grid
search approach whereas random search
approaches slightly better than what
grid search approach is that is we take
random values of hyper parameters both
one and two randomly we pick here they
are equally spaced usually typically
equally equally spaced or discrete
values of hyper parameters we choose
specific values of hyper parameter 2
also so it is always a combination of
this and this whereas here since we are
randomly picking it these point points
can be anywhere this may not be in a
grid because these points are is is
randomly chosen between hyper parameters
one and two we get the model here gets
to see various different values of the
hyper parameters right so here let's say
the model got to see the hyper parameter
value to only four different unique
values but see here you can see the
model has seen this value here this
value here for this parameter this value
here for this parameter this value so on
and so for right so the model gets to
see multiple different values of hyper
parameter both one and two both two and
one here all right so that is the
advantage of random search okay the
search is more more variety will be
there however the problem is both of
these approaches are time consuming in
random search we will never ever get to
probably know the lowest value of your
hyper parameters mean they have the
combination of hyper parameters that is
going to give you the lowest value of
the errors also the search space when we
especially with grid search might be
limited for example we are searching for
these three values of hyper parameter
one what of the optimal value lies
outside these values right that is also
a limitation when we deal with both of
these approaches so these are dropbacks
but the biggest dropback with both of
these approaches is this now let's say
here the red points and the green points
are the points that you have hyper
parameter one and Hyper parameter yp2
hyper parameter 2 now these points these
Reds and these greens are the points
that the model has already trained on
the whites are yet to be trained now we
know that the model is performing good
in this region and it's not so good in
this region now with this information
this information is not used both of in
both of grid search as well as random
search but if this is the information
given to you what would be the value or
what would be the values that you would
try for your next iteration they more
likely to try around this area isn't it
because this is green this is doing well
right because this area is doing well we
will try and find out for this
particular region for the best possible
parameter combination but we don't take
that information account when into
account when we are using grid search as
well as random search so this is exactly
what bayian bayian optimization is all
about it tries to make use of the prior
information to make the subsequent
searches so that we will be able to find
the optimal Point quite fast so this is
the fundamental idea behind byian
optimization but how does this work work
so what we are concerned is about
finding the probability of getting a
specific model score getting a specific
model score this could be model score
this could be a cost function cost
function or sorry the loss function loss
function like error some type of an
error or it could be accuracy right
accuracy means we want to maximize it
loss function means we want to minimize
it error means we want to minimize it
right so what's the probability of
getting a particular model score given a
particular configuration of the hyper
parameters so this is ultimately what we
want to find out but we want to find
this we want to find the configuration
that gives the maximum or minimum
depending on the objective giving the
what is the configuration that gives the
maximum model score but at the same time
we don't have the liberty of trying out
all of these iterations all of these
configurations possible Right the number
of iterations or the number of
iterations means training here each
training process is what we refer to as
iteration the number of iterations is
something that we want to reduce so we
want to achieve this objective with
minimum number of iterations how do we
do this this essentially boils down into
four steps first we need a surrogate
model surrogate model is nothing but the
model where we predict the model score
or the objective function whatever we
want to call it so predict the objective
function given a particular
configuration of hyper parameters right
so we will have a surate model at the
same time we cannot estimate this for
all possible combinations or all
possible configurations right we want to
minimize the number of iterations so we
need an acquisition function also so
this acquisition function will guide the
search guide the search means if you are
familiar with the concept of
reinforcement learning if you're
familiar with
reinforcement learning with the idea
behind say multi-m Bandits and all this
is quite similar to that where this
acquisition function will have the
opportunity to explore either explore or
exploit exploit means what it means is
basically we know that these regions are
doing well if we know that these regions
are doing well we will try to for the
next iteration when it goes for an
exploit option it will try to choose
data points around this region okay so
it will go for data points in this in
this particular Zone that would be
exploit explor would be it will try to
find out or try to test out data points
that is farther away right randomly it
will show some other points somewhere in
the board and it will try to explore how
the model score turns out to be for a
different configuration so that's what
explore is so to do this there are
various techniques such as the expected
Improvement method or the upper
confidence bound method you can use to
use as the acquisition function so this
will essentially guide how the model or
how the algorithm is searching for the
next iterate next configuration of the
hyperparameter so once the next
iteration or configuration is chosen we
will use again the surrogate model in
this step to evaluate the newly chosen
configuration right so we will evaluate
it find the score again score or the
objective function again and then use
that newly found information and store
it back into the surrogate model again
so this process that is steps two and
three these will go on until the
optimization or objective function does
not improve anymore or the number of
iterations that the user has set has
been achieved so this is the whole idea
behind it if you want to understand
simply right if you want to understand
simply what uh sgate function versus
surate function versus acquisition
function does is simply say this is your
grid this is your hyper parameter hyper
parameter grid say you have the hyper
parameter one and Hyper parameter 2 on
the y-axis all right now you have this
grid think of this grid as a map okay
this think of this grid as a map where
only few data points we have sampled
okay we want to trace the lines in this
map say you you have a particular
country and you want to trace the lines
and the lines where the lines are the
lines are the points where your
objective function the objective
function is highest so higher the
objective function suppose if it's
accuracy we want to maximize it right
suppose your objective is increasing the
accuracy we want to go in a in a
particular route that will reach us to
the maximum suppose this is the point
where it has the maximum highest
accuracy starting somewhere randomly we
want to reach this point at the fastest
rate right the acquisition function the
acquisition function is something that
will that will estimate the height of
these points okay think of this as a
contour you might have seen Contour
graphs and all where you have say red
colors dark red colors wherever the
point is very high the the value is very
high heat Maps kind of thing right and
the milder the color becomes the the
lower the values are can think of it
like this so the acquisition Point
acquisition function will help you
estimate the value of the objective
function at any given point right
likewise The Sur okay sorry the
surrogate function I'm talking about
surrogate function here surate function
will estimate this objective value and
the and the acquisition function
acquisition function will decide what
route to take in order to reach the
optimal point so this is the fundamental
idea behind bin optimization let's
implement this in code okay so we will
see couple of implementations of
hyperparameter optimization One is using
the optuna package the other is using
GP opt so both are good we will see both
in this one so for optuna you need to
First install pip install optuna and
psychic learn all right so once that is
done I'll give you the link to the this
particular data set or this particular
notebook in the description please use
that link to try to get this and try it
out first we will import the packages
optin by pandas and from psyit learn we
are going to be using the breast cancer
data set and we will also use these also
all right so basic steps first we will
download the data load the data set
which is the breast cancer data set we
get the X the features and the Y form
the use Trin test plate to form your
xtrain X validation y train and Y
validation basic steps now in order to
do the hyper parameter optimization we
Define the objective function this is
the key this is the main part where you
define what the hyper parameters are so
you are passing it into a dictionary
okay hyper parameters and what could be
the potential values each of these
parameters could take okay depending on
what the nature of the values are here
these are integers so trial do suggest
okay this trial is the object that we
are passing to the objective itself then
we will train the Train the random
Forest classifier fit it that is this is
the training part itself then get the
predicted value
and compute the accuracy score and we
are returning the accuracy score this is
the objective function now once that is
done we are ready to create a study that
we are using the optuna this is present
as a method inside optuna object itself
and since we are using accuracy we are
setting the direction as maximize okay
so the study is created then called
study. optimize the number of TRS we are
setting as 100 you can increase this
number if you have more computation
power and patience all right so this is
the we app printing out the uh the
number of Trials it took the Bas
parameters and the trial value itself so
I have already run this code and you can
see it has run for about 100 different
iterations and at the end you get an
accuracy of
9649 okay so this is the best
performance so once the model is once
the training is done the search is done
we use the best parameter so from study
get the best trial and the parameters
from that trial and rebuild this model
okay we have to retra train this model
using the best parameters and then you
can do the prediction also so this is
based on the optuna packaging now
similarly if you slightly go down in
this notebook we have the grid search CV
as well as the random search after this
we will Implement using gpy opt so this
is another package where you can use
Implement bation optimization we first
installing this now import gpy OPD and
this is implemented on the iris data set
same random Forest classifier now we
load the same steps we load the iris the
X and the Y then Define the objective
function again again same same stuff so
we are defining the parameters these
parameters instead of having it as a
dictionary we are estimating we are
creating separate objects for the
parameters then pass them into the
random Forest pacifier so these values
are going directly inside all right then
we are Computing the score and since we
want to minimize it is always going to
be minimized here we are getting the
score and adding a negative to it so now
it's going to be even though this is an
accuracy we are going to minimize here
because this is having a negative sign
so that is done we set the bounce for
the various various hyper parameters we
are defining the bounds and call gpy op.
methods ban optimization we pass the
objective function bounce and
acquisition function type equal to EI
expected Improvement you could also try
the other options especially the UCB
option which could also work well now
once that is done we run the optim
mization then get the best parameters
convert to integer values and then you
can get the best parameter values now
once the best parameters values are
estimated we need to sort of rebuild the
model again that is the random forest
classifier with the best parameter that
we have found out after building that
you can do the train test split fit the
model and get the best predictions so
this is the code quite straight forward
use the link in the description to try
this out on your own